INTERVIEWER 1: I would move back. OK.

SUBJECT: My name is Lucy Weinstein. Before I was married, I was Lucy [? Krebs. ?] I was born in Berleburg in Germany in 1924. And Berleburg is a small town. And during the Nazi period, in the beginning, there weren't many Nazis there. My father often used to say if there had been more in the beginning, and if they had beaten us up, not so many of us would have gotten killed. As it was in the town, there were about 11 Jewish families there. Practically everybody got killed with just-- one old man, in fact, survived. the concentration camps. And we were the last family to get out of the town, which was in 1941.

INTERVIEWER 1: How big was the town?

SUBJECT: The town at that time was about 3,000 inhabitants. Today, it's about 10,000. And, um, we, uh-- I come from a middle-class family. My father was a cattle dealer. And I'm the oldest of, uh, three children that my parents had. And we went to the local school. And actually, my first encounter with, um-- personal encounter with Nazism was one day when, uh, the kids came to school-- there had been, I guess, the Nazi meeting. And I came into the classroom, and they had put caricatures onto the blackboard with Jews with big noses. And they said that the Jews were going to bring down Germany and whatnot. And then, they all called me "dirty Jew" and [INAUDIBLE] they used to call me. And I remember that.

INTERVIEWER 1: Jordan?

SUBJECT: Hm? Jordan splasher.

INTERVIEWER 1: Why Jordan--

SUBJECT: Well, because Jews belonged to Palestine. And the Jordan was in Palestine, that we weren't really Germans. And up until that time, I had grown up to believe that I was a German by nationality and a Jew by religion. And I never considered myself as anything else. And I was horrified. And they all yelled at me, and I ran out of the classroom and grabbed my coat and ran. And they had put a dead mouse into my coat. However, to show you the, uh-- what kind of a town it was. A few days later, a lot of the kids who had participated in this had apparently mentioned this to their parents. And some of the parents had written letters of apologies to my parents because this was a small town. And, uh, my father was born there. And my grandfather had been born there. And so my parents were well-known. And people were embarrassed about that.

INTERVIEWER 1: Your parents had been generations--

SUBJECT: In Berleburg, Yes. They certainly were there. In fact, I was back last summer, and I checked. They were there as far as the records went, which the records for Jews didn't go back any further than around 1800. And they were there already at that time. They were-- they had been farmers in that, uh, town.

INTERVIEWER 1: Like any other German farmer?

SUBJECT: Well, they had a small farm, I suppose. Yes. How different? I don't know. But they had been farmers. And, um-- so not much happened. My-- we would have left, actually, earlier.

INTERVIEWER 1: What year were you born?

SUBJECT: I was born in 1924.

INTERVIEWER 1: '24. And the incident with the caricature?

SUBJECT: Maybe '36. But then it was quiet again.

INTERVIEWER 1: You mean that between '33 and '36, you-- there was nothing?

SUBJECT: In my school, not much, no. Children belonged to the Hitler Youth Movements. And we didn't. And I always had playmates. The parents insisted that the children continue to play with me. Certain parents, certainly, did. And then, um, after-- after that or perhaps even before that, another encounter was during religious lessons. During when they taught Christianity, religion. I did not participate. And I and another girl who was Catholic never participated in the religion. And one day, we sat outside. And they had brought in-- I think it must've been around 1936 that they brought in other teachers to indoctrinate people, especially in towns like Berleburg where the Nazis weren't very strong. They wanted to accelerate Nazism, and they brought in Nazi teachers to teach us, to teach the children. And during this religious session, this Catholic girl-- her name was Hilda-- and myself sat outside. We came a little bit early. And we heard this teacher tell the students that they shouldn't buy in Jewish stores, and which were the Jewish stores, and the Jews were traders, and all that sort of thing. But nothing happened. Nothing particular happened. And I continued to go to school there until 1938. November 9, during the Kristallnacht, that was really the first time we suffered. We were-- our windows were smashed. The synagogues were burnt. My father at that time, luckily, was--

INTERVIEWER 1: Synagogue?

SUBJECT: The synagogue, I beg your-- I beg your pardon. It was only one in our town. And a small one at that. My father had-- was hospitalized at that time, luckily so. Because we wanted to go to America at that time. And they had a rather high number. And he had heard that he had to be in good health to come over here. And he had a hernia and wanted to have it operated on. And so he was in the hospital and when they came that night to arrest him, he wasn't there. They had smashed all of our windows. And I still remember my mother screaming, get under the blankets. And-- which we did. And when we looked out, there was a sea of people outside. It's-- um, the whole town seemed to be out there.

INTERVIEWER 1: Local neighbors?

SUBJECT: Local people. Mm-hmm, yes. Well, neighbors. We couldn't recognize who was there. You know, it was at night. We looked out of the window and there they were. And they asked for my father. And, uh, we said he was in the house in the hospital. Whereupon, they left. And I remember my mother screaming, they're going in the direction of the hospital. They're going to arrest him. And we were petrified.

INTERVIEWER 1: The town with 3,000 inhabitants, that in '36 sent letters of apology. In '39, there were--

SUBJECT: '38.

INTERVIEWER 1: In '38, there were crowds of people--

SUBJECT: Yes. Yes.

INTERVIEWER 1: --smashing your windows.

SUBJECT: Yes.

INTERVIEWER 1: Asking for your father?

SUBJECT: Yes.

INTERVIEWER 1: The same people?

SUBJECT: Well, yes. Well, you see, there were probably-- there was probably an undercurrent of Nazism there all the time, but we didn't feel it because at school, there were sufficient people who were not Nazis who would play with us. From the point of view of a child I'm telling this now, right?

INTERVIEWER 1: And from point of view of a child, you also were learning about the new biology?

SUBJECT: No, we didn't learn that.

INTERVIEWER 1: They weren't teaching Rassenkunde?

SUBJECT: No. Not in my school. We only-- literature was restricted. I remember we weren't allowed to read Goethe and various other authors that were-- supposedly had been friendly with the Jews. Those, we weren't allowed to read.

INTERVIEWER 1: This was the explanation that Goethe was forbidden because he was friendly with the Jews?

SUBJECT: That's what I heard when I was a child.

INTERVIEWER 1: Was Schiller permitted?

SUBJECT: Schiller was permitted, because Schiller was-- especially, there was an anti-Semitic poem, I remember, that we read.

INTERVIEWER 2: [INAUDIBLE]?

SUBJECT: In school. Hm?

INTERVIEWER 2: Schiller.

SUBJECT: Schiller, yes.

INTERVIEWER 2: How about Heine?

SUBJECT: Heine? Oh, Heine we never read in school. Heine was Jewish. Converted , but I mean--

INTERVIEWER 1: Converted.

SUBJECT: Yes.

INTERVIEWER 2: You sounded really shocked at this idea of--

SUBJECT: Pardon?

INTERVIEWER 2: You sounded really shocked at the idea of reading Heine in school.

SUBJECT: Yeah. No, we didn't read. I read Heine by myself, but I was an avid reader. But I, uh-- not in school. Anyway, so the following day, my mother always insisted that we go to school, no matter what. She sent us to school. We didn't realize at the time, November 10, that this was a nationwide thing because Jews were not allowed to have radios. So we didn't know. We thought it was a local thing, because we had heard from other towns that people's windows had been smashed. I remember my uncle-- I had an uncle who lived in a small town near Giesen, Giesen in Hessin. And he wanted us to, uh, come to America with him. This was already in 1934. And it was because all the Jews were taken out on the street in the middle of the night and beaten up in that town. And my father, at that time, didn't want to go to America because he felt it was too difficult. He couldn't speak English and he had three small children. And he thought that that was just that town, that this would not happen in his town. And of course, local people, all of his friends whom he had grown up with, assured him that Hitler would be overthrown and that we shouldn't leave. And Jewish friends, too, told him the same thing. And quite a few of those, of course, were killed then in concentration camps later on. And so we thought that finally, it had gotten to Berleburg. That this was a local thing, we thought. But-- and so the following day, I went to school. And that's the first time that pe-- nobody spoke to me in school.

INTERVIEWER 1: You were in what grade then?

SUBJECT: I was-- huh. That is-- I was in the --

INTERVIEWER 2: Junior in high school.

SUBJECT: Yes.

INTERVIEWER 2: Junior in high school. Eighth? Ninth grade.

SUBJECT: Something like that. Eighth grade, yeah. I guess so Eighth grade. And I remember, I walked in. I came an hour late for some reason, I don't remember.

INTERVIEWER 1: That was the day following the Kristallnacht?

SUBJECT: Yes. Was that the 9th or the 10th of-- the 10th, wasn't it? Yeah, the 10th. Anyways, the night following the Kristallnacht, I went to school. And I will never forget that day. I walked in, and my class had an exam in mathematics. And, uh, when I walked in, they all laughed. And I stood there, and then the teacher, who was a very polite man, told me to sit down, and gave me my exam book, and told me to do my exam, which I did. And then when that was over, they started teasing me that I looked so pale. And that the synagogue had been operated on an appendix. I knew nothing about the synagogue at the time yet. I didn't know. But I heard these remarks from children. And nobody spoke to me. And they all ran away from me. Some of them sort of smiled and laughed shyly. And I didn't know what happened. So finally, the director of the school called me in and said that I should go home. And that I would hear from them. So I went home. And then later on, I heard that we had been expelled from school and what had happened to the synagogue. And I ran over there. And I remember that they were knocking down whatever was left with an ax and with various things. And I saw on the street-- I remember, a flag I had mad-- made because we had had a festival on Simhat Torah before, where all the children had made flags. And I saw my flag with the 10 commandments of Moses lying on the ground. And, uh, so that was that. But then in the meantime, my mother was terribly frightened about my father. And she was afraid to go to the hospital, and sent my brother over there to see if my father had been arrested because they were going in that direction. And finally, my brother came back and said that he was still there. And then, that evening we went to the hospital. And my father was beside himself because some farmer had walked in and had said that all the Jews had been arrested, and had told him the horrible story. And my brother, who was four years younger than I was at the time-- he was 10. Uh, he said, I just wanted to see that you are all right and you are OK. Fine. And he ran off. And so my father was in a terrible state. He knew something went-- was going wrong. And he didn't have the full picture of the situation. At any rate, when we went there that night, my mother spoke to the doctor, who was in charge. And the doctor said, yes, they came here. And he said, I will not let him go. Only over my dead body. And, uh--

INTERVIEWER 1: That was a German doctor?

SUBJECT: German doctor, yes. Dr. Hammer was his name. And he, uh, protected my father. And they came back after a week, and he said-- and the nurses supported him-- that my-- complications had set in and this man was unfit to go home. And he kept him there for three weeks until the wave had passed, and they sort of let him come home. However, my grandfather was arrested. And my uncle was arrested. And the whole town, everybody from the age of 14 up until 80, or whatever. Everybody. All males were arrested during this period.

INTERVIEWER 1: How many?

SUBJECT: There weren't all that many. There were only about 10, 11 families at that time in that town. So, uh-- but they all were sent to concentration camps. But I do remember that we put sack cloth over our windows because they were throwing stones at night through the broken windows. And of course, nobody would fix our windows. And we put sack cloths there. And one night, we heard somebody tapping on the window, and we all shuttered, you know? We didn't know who it was. And then finally, he called and it was my grandfather. And apparently, the local policeman, who also knew him ever since he was a child, had let him go. He sort of got him out and saw to it that he wasn't sent away with the others. But the others were sent to concentration camps, my uncle and other Jewish men. So anyway, a week after that-- I think it was about in December, in the middle of December.

INTERVIEWER 1: Mmm. The, the-- out of the 10 Jewish families, 9 were sent off to camp?

SUBJECT: Well, they didn't all have men in them. There was, for instance, one family consisted only of two elderly women. Yes.

INTERVIEWER 1: Took care even for-- with this small population to send the men--

SUBJECT: Yes.

INTERVIEWER 1: --to camps. Where?

SUBJECT: Uranienborg, I think at that time, some of them went.

INTERVIEWER 1: For how long?

SUBJECT: Well, I left, in the meantime, so-- before they got back. So uh, I couldn't tell you. Some never returned, others got out. My uncle, for instance, who went to Uranienborg, later on got to England. He went to England. And uh, in the middle of December, my brother and my sister and I went with a children's transport to Belgium. At that time, all the children who had been expelled from school tried to go abroad. And the surrounding countries did take children. And the rea--

INTERVIEWER 1: That is December 19--

SUBJECT: 1938.

INTERVIEWER 1: '38. And your parents?

SUBJECT: My parents could not go because we all wanted to go to America. And by the time my father got ready to go to America, which I think was in 1936, he decided to go, because he was no longer allowed to conduct any business at all at that time. And there was the, uh, quota system was so low, that they had to have a number. And my parents got a number to come to the American Consulate, which would get them there on May 10, 1940. I remember the date exactly. I'll tell you in a little while why. So we couldn't wait for that. And in the meantime, we thought that, uh-- my parents thought that the children should go to Belgium, where my mother's sister was. She had emigrated to Belgium with her husband and her daughter. And, uh, that we could go to school there in Belgium. And we would wait then until my parents would get their visa, and they would then join us in Belgium, they thought. And we would go to America from there, you see? And-- but then when my father got back out of the hospital, and after we left for Belgium, he had to-- he was taken away and had to do slave labor, work on a railroad since he hadn't been in a concentration camp and that wave sort of was over. So he did slave labor for-- I don't know for how long. But I think for about two years. So in the meantime, we went to Belgium-- I was the oldest-- with this children's transport. And we were met by my aunt. And we lived in Malines, Mechelen, in Flanders for two years. And, uh, with my aunt. We all went to Catholic schools there and were under considerable pressure to convert to Catholicism. Actually. We were the only Jews there in Belgium.

INTERVIEWER 1: There were still free Belgium?

SUBJECT: Oh, yes. That's the next chapter. So, uh, we went to school from, uh-- after Christmas 1939. We arrived before Christmas. And after vacation was over, we went to school. We learned Flemish. We went to a Flemish school there. And then in 1940-- oh, yeah. In the meantime, we were called to the American Consulate in Antwer-- Antwerp, the children. And we all got our visa to go to the United States subject to my parents' visa because we were all under 16 and we did not have a sponsorship that would permit us to go without our parents, you see? So it was this technicality. And they kept our visa there in the embassy. Then, on May 10, 1940, the day my parents were called to Stuttgart, to the American Embassy in Stuttgart, to get their visa, that was the day the Germans invaded Belgium, and the war broke out. And we lost contact with them. And of course, nobody thought that Hitler would just march through and be in Paris three weeks later, you know? But the bombarding was horrendous. And all of our-- and then in Belgium-- by that time, I spoke Flemish without an accent. So strangers never thought even that I was German. However, my uncle, who spoke with a heavy accent, he was constantly arrested as a German spy because he had this accent. So finally, the police chief in Mechelen said, I better keep you here because they're going to kill you until this wave is over. So he was arrested and stayed with the police, and was subsequently sent-- as the Germans invaded, he was sent to France. And my aunt--

INTERVIEWER 2: The police sent him? Who sent him?

SUBJECT: Yeah. Well, I don't know. Together with other people whom they had arrested. They were all sent on a transport to France into safety, supposedly. At that time, nobody thought Paris was going to fall, you know?

INTERVIEWER 1: So the Belgians tried to save their lives?

SUBJECT: Yes. Oh, yes. And then, uh, my aunt and her daughter, who was 17, and 5-- and 5 refugees she had taken in. We all went. We were alone together. And then, the neighbor said, we must flee because the bombardments, the nightly bombardments, were so terrible. The blitzkrieg. The Germans were bombarding that-- we just couldn't stand it. We had to leave. So everybody left. And we packed whatever we could take on bicycles and had knapsacks. And we marched with all of Belgium toward France. And we walked for three weeks.

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe that?

SUBJECT: Pardon.

INTERVIEWER 1: The war has begun. There are German bombardments and you're in a march towards France-- France. Can you describe that? People? Crowds?

SUBJECT: Enormous crowds. I mean, I'm sure that has been shown on television quite often and regularly.

INTERVIEWER 1: Your memories.

SUBJECT: My memories? Well, I pushed-- since I was the oldest of three, and I was the strongest, and the most athletic--

INTERVIEWER 1: How old? How old?

SUBJECT: 15. I pushed the bicycle with whatever food we could take and a few things that we had. I don't know. And we slept at night. Sometimes, in barns. Sometimes, in schools. I remember one night sleeping on a school bench. And sometimes, in gut-- in the gutter. And sometimes, not at all. I remember we were so tired my sister once was walking in front of me. And she stood still and she hit me. And I fell back. And a whole row of us fell over because we were sleepwalking, which we weren't aware of. And, uh, the bomb-- as the bombing went on, you know? And we would fall on the ground. And the Ger-- we went, actually, straight through the German lines. You know, they were taking us over. One night-- one day, I remember we had slept-- we had slept in a barn. That's right. We had gone into a barn. My cousin-- my cousin was also there-- was sleeping next to me. And, um, we woke up in the morning and she was kicking me. I said, what are you kicking me for? And all of a sudden, I hear this voice in French, and there was a soldier sleeping under us. Neither he nor we were aware of this because they had come back from a battle, a French soldier. And there were only a few left in the battle. All the others had been killed. And the dying horses were lying outside the barn. And as we walked out, the bombardments were horrendous.

INTERVIEWER 1: Now, on what territory were you at that moment?

SUBJECT: Belgium. It was toward the French border. But we were-- the Germans overtook us in a small town called Menen It was right on the French border. And, uh--

INTERVIEWER 1: When you describe this barn incident, had you already been--

SUBJECT: Was near there.

INTERVIEWER 1: --overtaken by the Germans or not?

SUBJECT: No, that was before.

INTERVIEWER 1: Still, you were under Allied?

SUBJECT: We were still-- yes, with the allies. And I remember, we got up in the morning and the soldiers who were there, they wanted to wash. And I was pumping water for them. And we were all working wildly for the war effort. We felt we had to do any-- everything possible to help wherever we could. And we didn't believe that this was happening. And then, this continuous bombardment, some people went hysterical. And I remember some Belgium women, all of a sudden, jumped up as the German airplanes came through the air like that with their rosaries up in the air, and screaming for a miracle to happen. And they were just all mowed down. And then, in Menen where we were in Menen they-- in the meantime, they were dropping leaflets that we should give ourselves up. And that, uh-- that Paris had fallen. And we didn't-- just didn't believe it until--

INTERVIEWER 1: Paris had fallen?

SUBJECT: It had, yes.

INTERVIEWER 1: The way you describe it--

SUBJECT: Or it was about to.

INTERVIEWER 1: The way you describe it, it sounds that the people fleeing didn't quite realize the-- the defeat?

SUBJECT: No, we didn't. Nobody realized the defeat until it happened. And I remember when it happened. We were in a barn in Menen And this farm woman came and said that there were Germans all around. And, um-- so we all said we would hide. We were afraid, you know, that they would-- the Belgians, too. Most of the people in our group were Belgians. We were with about 40 people, all Belgians. And we were in a barn behind a kind of wall that was as high as a person. And, um, then we hear this woman walking in, this farm woman, with a German soldier. And she doesn't understand much German, but we understood it. I understood it. And the German soldier asked, are you hiding any refugees? And she said, no, no. We were all behind that wall. And, uh, asked various questions if she had bicycles. That they wanted to confiscate all the bicycles. And she denied everything and said she didn't understand and all sorts of things. And then finally, when, uh, he left-- the Belgian sent out some scouts to see if there were, in fact, taking all the bicycles. But they weren't taking them all. Then finally, we decided, we had better go back. And it was really true. Oh, yeah. The war was over, they said. This man said the-- the German said the war was over. And that, in fact, he was right. The war was over. The scouts who had gone out found out. And that we might as well go back. And, uh-- so we went back. And I remember at first, we were in such a state of shock that we couldn't understand it. Some of the Germans tried to be quite nice to us. And I remember, they had-- when we came out, there were some soldiers who were trying to give us coffee and cake. And we were all in this line. And I remember, I had the arrogance to say to him, I don't drink German coffee. He could have arrested me, but I got through. Was an arrogant kid. So, um, after that, we took-- I remember, I had the bicycle. So as we came closer to Malines, I got on my bicycle to see if our house was still there. And I got there. I was the first one to get back. And, uh, it was there. So then, we lived under German occupation. But actually, I forgot to mention this earlier. It was quite horrendous. When I told you about my uncle being constantly arrested. Well, we were very lucky because we could have been easily arrested by the French and the Belgians, who were hysterical against anybody who was German. I mean, there you were no longer a Jew. You were a German. And we had German passports in those days. German identification cards, we had. And I remember as we were walking, the sleepwalking as we were escaping, we-- the thing that we dreaded was that we should be asked to show our identity card. And they only did spot checks, you see? And at one point, I was spotted. And a Frenchman said to me that I should show my identity card. And, uh, I was so scared. I didn't know what to do. I said, if you want it, you have to take it yourself. It's in my knapsack. I'm too tired. And with that, I fell on the floor. I was-- I mean, it wasn't much of an act. We were exhausted. He said, go on. He-- he just thought I was a Belgian. And we weren't caught. If we had been caught, we would have been sent to Gurs. That's where they sent Jews.

INTERVIEWER 2: What was Gurs?

SUBJECT: Gurs was a camp in the south of France.

INTERVIEWER 2: In the south of France?

SUBJECT: Yeah. In, um-- yeah. It was first in unoccupied, France, wasn't it? And then it was--

INTERVIEWER 1: Mmm.

SUBJECT: --occupied. Huh? Yeah, I had an uncle who died there. Anyway. Anyway, we came back. And then, a week or so later my uncle arrived back, miraculously. They had-- they had been sent to France. And the Germans then had invaded, and they quickly ran away, he and another man. And when they realized the Germans were everywhere, somehow they made their way back. And they were back at home with us. Now in the meantime, my-- my parents tried to contact us and couldn't. All communication had been interrupted with Belgium, you know? And their visa were only good for three months. They had gotten their visa in May. And by the time they were able to make contact with us, it was August, and their visa had expired. And in the meantime, they frantically had tried to book passages. They always thought they would find us. They had booked passages via Russia, and Vladivostok, into the Dominican Republic, and lost everything. And my father said he's not leaving without us because he felt that if he left and left us behind, we would-- that would be the end. We would never make it. And so he decided to let his visa expire and try to find-- find us. So, um, in August, they found us through the Red Cross. And then, they tried to get us out of Belgium. This was very difficult, because our visa that had been in the embassy in Antwerp no longer existed because that embassy had been bombed. And so the only way we could get out was via Germany. And, um--

INTERVIEWER 1: Your visa to the US you mean was bombed?

SUBJECT: Yes, the embassy had been bombed so it didn't exist anymore. So in the meantime, from Germany, my father tried to get new papers for all of us because his-- theirs had expired, too. And through my relatives and Jewish organizations, like the Jewish Joint Refugee Organization. What was it called? They-- they got the ball rolling. And he-- and he got a new appointment for us to go to the consulate in Stuttgart in-- when was it? In February of 1941. However, by the time all of this was arranged, it was already Fall 1940. And in the meantime, I had-- I was 16. I had become 16. And there was a law that Jews over 16 were not allowed to enter Germany. And, uh, we had to go back to Germany in order to get out. And-- So my brother and my sister, and another cousin of mine who was also with us, and another boy, who was also a refugee, who stayed there, they all left. And I was the only one who stayed behind. And I really thought they were going to get out and I was-- I was ready to runaway and do-- kill myself. Do all sorts of things in those days because there was-- it seemed there was no hope. But, uh, they-- so they went back to my parents. And my father, in the meantime, who had done slave labor for a couple of years, I think. Maybe a year and a half or two years, I don't remember exactly. But he had gotten time off to arrange for the Immigration. And he was at home then when my brother and my sister came. And so finally, my mother at that time tried one more trick. And that was to go to the mayor of our town and to ask-- and to speak to him. And to say that in order for Germany to get rid of one more Jew, they would have to let me re-enter for a couple of months, so that I could pick up my visa to go to America. And uh, then leave. And he-- he wrote that. He wrote a letter to the [INAUDIBLE] commandant in [INAUDIBLE], in Malines, to this effect. And, um, they-- they granted me entry into Germany. They gave me the papers. And so, um, I went back to Germany in, uh, February of 1941. And that was a period when that-- that was very difficult to arrange because there were terrible curfews on. I couldn't go through to Berleburg in one day from Belgium, because I would be breaking the law. We were only allowed on the street for two hours or three hours a day, I don't remember what it was.

INTERVIEWER 1: What hours?

SUBJECT: I don't remember that, really. But I know that my parents and my uncle made arrangements that-- for me to travel on the train. I had to go via Aachen, cross the border in Aachen. And I was to go to Cologne, and then stay in the Jewish orphanage in Cologne, where they had made arrangements for me. And then, the next day, when-- whatever the time was when I was allowed out, I could continue. And then, my father would meet me in Siegen, which was close to Berleburg. That was where I changed train, and then took a little local train to Berleburg. So anyway, all these elaborate arrangements were made. And when I got to Aachen, however, I remember for the first time, they all dressed me up. I have a feeling they didn't think I was going to make it. They bought me a new outfit with a big, blue hat and slightly elevated shoes, which I wore for the first time. I was very proud. And I had my heavy-- I had two heavy suitcases. What on earth I had in two heavy suitcases, I don't know. But anyway. And they pushed me onto the train. When I got to Aachen, two SS men came and helped me out of the car and carried my suitcases to the-- to the place where we had to show the passports. And, uh, I pulled out my passport. And at that point, my passport had a big J in it, of course. And the moment they saw that, of course, the suitcases were dropped. And, uh, the whole tone changed. And they were beside themselves, apparently. And they felt I had to be interrogated. And, uh, a big commotion started to go around in Aachen. And everybody was alerted that there was a Jew on the train and all of that. So then, they-- there was a nurse there. And they made me go to the nurse. And I had to undress and be examined. They thought I might carry weapons and all sorts of things. I don't know. It was ghastly. And then finally, after I was dressed again, they called me into a room and they started to interrogate me, what I was-- that I-- whether I knew that I was breaking the law. And I showed them the letter. And since that didn't work, they said-- they tried to get me to make a statement that my father had made anti-Hitler remarks. And then, my uncle. And they knew for certain that my uncle had spoken against Hitler. And the whole thing lasted for two hours. During which time I said I didn't-- we never talked politics at home. We were told to say all these things. Children were told to say these things.

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you describe the interrogation? Who were the interrogators?

SUBJECT: Yes.

INTERVIEWER 1: How did they ask questions?

SUBJECT: Well, they were very rude. They had whips and they hit themselves on their boots constantly as they spoke like that. They didn't do anything to me, but I was terrified.

INTERVIEWER 1: Who were they? What did they look like?

SUBJECT: SS men.

INTERVIEWER 1: What age?

SUBJECT: That I don't remember. I couldn't remember what they looked like. They looked the same to me, the two SS men. I don't remember what they looked like. But I think they were young.

INTERVIEWER 2: They were all young.

SUBJECT: They were all young. I think so, too.

INTERVIEWER 2: Tape.

INTERVIEWER 1: Tape. We are changing the tape.

[INTERPOSING VOICES]

Change of tape

SUBJECT: Yeah. How do you-- how do you say that? They called him, in German, Leip-- Leip--

INTERVIEWER 1: [SPEAKING GERMAN]

SUBJECT: [SPEAKING GERMAN]

INTERVIEWER 1: In search. In body search.

SUBJECT: [INAUDIBLE]

INTERVIEWER 1: Body search.

SUBJECT: Body search, yeah.

INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah?

INTERVIEWER 1: You all right with Aachen?

SUBJECT: Oh, I do that over? You want me to do that over? Yes. We arrived, and--

INTERVIEWER 1: You arrived in Aachen in Germany, in 1941. February, 1941.

SUBJECT: February 1941. It was ice cold out. It was-- there was snow everywhere. And then two SS men came to the car and were very polite and helped me with my suitcases. And they-- and in fact, they spoke to me in French, and I answered in French. I was very naive. You know? They spoke to me in French, I answered back. So we went to the passport control. And when I pulled out my passport, which had a J in it, all of a sudden, they were astounded. They dropped my suitcases and were very rude to me and asked me what I was doing here, that I was breaking the law, and so on and so forth.

INTERVIEWER 1: You were a young girl of 16?

SUBJECT: 16, yes.

INTERVIEWER 1: Entering Germany.

SUBJECT: Entering Germany. Wearing a hat for the first time. [LAUGHS] I was-- my relatives had dressed me up to look grown up for the first time. That's what I was aspiring to at the time. So anyway, then, yeah. That's right. First, they looked through my suitcases, or somebody else did. We had to go through this--

INTERVIEWER 3: Customs.

SUBJECT: Customs. Through customs. It's funny. When I recall this, the German words seem to come out of my-- more than the English ones do. And Anyway, I went through customs, and then they had left word that I had to be examined by this nurse, physical examination. They wanted to check that I wasn't carrying anything, weapons, or documents, all sorts of things they suspected me of. And then afterwards, I was called into this room. And I remember the room as an office, sort of. And I sat on a chair, and one sat on one side, and the other one sat on top of a table, there. And they asked me questions. They interrogated me for about two hours. And first, how dare I come back. And that I would-- I should be arrested for this. And then I showed my letter to them. I had this letter from the [INAUDIBLE] Commandant that I was allowed to re-enter Germany in order to get my visa. And then they tried, by all sorts of tricks, to get me to make a statement that my father had made remarks-- anti-Hitler remarks. And then when it wasn't my father, then they certainly had evidence, they said, that my uncle had made such remarks and what he had said. And they wanted me to make a statement. Of course, we were all alerted by that time not ever to say anything that was said in the house. And of course, I knew that. And I said that we do not talk about politics at home. And I never said anything. So finally, after two hours or so, a German officer, an older man, came in. And he said-- he screamed, and he said, the whole train is waiting! Why don't you let that girl go! She doesn't have anything! And she's been examined, and the train has to go on! So anyway, finally, they did let me go. They practically threw me out of there with my two suitcases. And I faced a train of hostile people hanging out of every window, practically, shaking their fists, calling me a dirty Jew. That I was disrupting the train service. I was holding up the train. And all sorts of abusive language was used. And I just stood there and tried to push along with my two heavy suitcases and finally managed to get onto-- toward the train. And then somebody got out of the train and helped me. And it was a young man who had been-- who was a German, who had lived in Belgium, and who was called back to go into the army. He had-- that was not-- that was courage. He got out of the train and helped me with my suitcases. And then he talked to me later on the train. So I sat in the train. People came by and said things, but not much happened. I-- my-- my aunt had said, when people are nasty, just look out of the window. And I kept on looking out of the window, you see, constantly. And so then the train left. However, it was two hours late. And the curfew was over when I got to Cologne. And I was breaking the law. I-- I was not allowed on the street when I--

INTERVIEWER 1: The curfew was on, you mean.

SUBJECT: The curfew-- the curfew was on. The time we were allowed out was over. We were only allowed out certain hours. And my uncle had said to me, when you arrive in Cologne, you take a taxi. And here's the address. I was supposed to go to the Jewish orphanage and stay overnight there. And they were supposed to put me on the train the next day. And here I arrived, and it was night. And--

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you wearing the star?

SUBJECT: Pardon?

INTERVIEWER 1: Were you wearing the star?

SUBJECT: No, no. They didn't wear stars yet. Not in '41, at that time. And when I got there, I called a taxi. And I told the driver where I wanted to go, and he took me there. And there was this house with a big gate. And it was pitch black, and not a soul was inside. And he let me off, and I rang the bell, and nobody answered. And I knocked on the door, and nobody answered. And-- and I knocked and knocked. It was late at night. I didn't know what to do. Finally, this little woman looked through-- opened the door a tiny bit. A little old woman. And I said, I'm Lucy Krebs. I've come from Belgium. Oh! Child! We thought you would never arrive. We didn't think you were coming anymore. You know? And she was beside herself. And she let me in. And before I-- yeah. And as I walked into the room, I remember, doors were opening up, and all these kids were looking, and they-- as though I had arrived from the moon, you know? And they were terribly nice to me. They were just beside themselves that I had got there during the curfew, at the time when nobody was allowed out, and how lucky I was that I didn't get arrested. And I told them my whole horrible story, and they all wanted to know what Belgium was like. How is it? And especially the children. I was up all night with the children talking about what life was like outside of Germany. You know? And I went to school there, and how it was. And we talked a great deal. And then they gave me some dinner. And I was-- actually, I was quite shocked. They had herring salad with just a little piece of herring here and there, and the rest was some kind of a glue mixed with a little potato. They weren't-- Jewish rations were very meager in those days, as my parents' rations were too, as I found out later. But so was it in Belgium. We didn't have much food either. Because I brought sandwiches. And in fact, I brought a sandwich home, and my mother was shocked at the kind of bread we ate in Belgium, which had dirt in it. With the flour. Anyway, I stayed in the orphanage overnight. And then they put me onto a train the next day. And when I arrived in Siegen you know, I had a funny experience. A soldier tried to pick me up on the train. A German soldier. A young man. And I remember, as I was told to always look out of the window. And I was looking out of the window very constantly. I didn't look at anybody. And there was this hand going over my lap all the time. And I knew there was this soldier sitting there, and I knew I shouldn't talk to him. And I-- I didn't know what to do. How to handle this. It was terrible. And he started to talk about the war and things, that, of course, Germany was going to win the war. And-- but if-- if-- just-- if they didn't, the Americans were going to send the blacks over, and they were going to kill all the Germans, and things like that. I said, yes, probably they will. And then he said what I was doing-- where I was going. And I was afraid to lie. I said where I was going. He said, oh, Berleburg, which was in the mountains. He said, what are you doing in Berleburg? I said, I'm going skiing. So. [LAUGHS] And then he said he wanted to meet me. He also wanted to go skiing. And so I said, well, I didn't know yet where I was going to stay. I was going to be friends. And I was trying to be very evasive. So finally, he got off somewhere, and I got rid of him. But when I got to Siegen, I had changed a tremendous amount between the age of 14 and 16, because I was very under-developed when I left for Belgium, you know? Wore long pig tails, and I looked like I was 12, really. And suddenly, I was a young woman when I got back. And I saw my father and my brother on the station, and I-- I waved to them on the station. And my brother said, there! There she is. My father kept on insisting on looking in the other direction. Didn't dare to look at me. And then later, I said, he didn't recognize me, and he was afraid that the idea of rassenschande was so dangerous, that a man should look at a woman who waves, that he was-- it took quite some time for us to make contact. You know?

INTERVIEWER 1: Rassenschande the non-Jew and Jew having sexual--

SUBJECT: Well, no. But that was misinterpreted. I mean, if he had smiled at me, it could have also been taken for that. You know? If I had been put up for that purpose. Because in 1941, the term was used any way they wanted to use it, and my father was very cautious, apparently. So anyway, they were very happy to have me back, and we-- we went home. And then shortly thereafter, we went to the American Consulate. But by this time, having-- having had that horrible experience in Aachen, I had a dreadful cold. I couldn't-- I had laryngitis. I couldn't speak. I think I had bronchitis by the time I got to the consulate for my visa. And there, too, I had terrible trouble. The doctor didn't want to give me my visa. They were very mean, anyway. They-- at the American Consulate. The-- he said I had TB. And he said that I had to have an x-ray taken before he could make any decision, and that was going to take a certain amount of time, again, and my father was afraid we were going to lose our visa again and whatnot. So finally, he sent me to a German doctor. And I had a-- an x-ray taken. And the German doctor says, any doctor who says that you have TB isn't worth being a doctor, because you have nothing but a common cold. And he sent me back. And then someone said to my father that he has to bribe, otherwise he won't get me out.

INTERVIEWER 1: To bribe the American physician?

SUBJECT: Yes. I don't know whether it was done directly to the physician, but somebody had to be bribed. And I didn't get my visa, actually, until oh, about three or four weeks later.

INTERVIEWER 1: American officials--

SUBJECT: Had-- yes. Were bribed.

INTERVIEWER 1: And the German embassies had to be bribed to give Jews exit visas.

SUBJECT: Yes. Certain-- in certain cases. And in this case, in fact, my father also got my grandfather out, who didn't even have a visa. And he didn't want to leave his father behind. And his papers were not in order, but he managed to get him out. I don't remember how.

INTERVIEWER 1: Can you repeat it in your words? About the bribery?

SUBJECT: I-- all I heard-- you see, it wasn't discussed in front of us. That sort of thing wasn't discussed in front of the children. I just heard this in a very roundabout way, that with-- in my case, that I was refused a visa because the doctor thought I had TB.

INTERVIEWER 1: That would be what doctor?

SUBJECT: The American doctor. And I had to have an x-ray taken. And the doctor who gave me the x-ray was a German doctor. I don't remember who he was. He said that this was ridiculous, lunacy. I didn't have TB. I had a cold. And then someone told my father, and it had to be done.

INTERVIEWER 1: What?

SUBJECT: Bribery. Some money had to be paid. That I don't remember. I don't know. I was never told. And we just weren't told that. You know? This was kept secret. The fact that I found out this much was because I overheard people--

INTERVIEWER 1: In order to--

SUBJECT: In order for me to get out and my grandfather--

INTERVIEWER 1: To get what?

SUBJECT: To get my visa.

INTERVIEWER 1: To get your American visa.

SUBJECT: American visa, yes. And--

INTERVIEWER 1: And your father did bribe.

SUBJECT: I assume. I didn't see it. But my father, I was told this. Well, I don't know if he did it, even, directly. Because my father-- I don't see how my father could have had the money. It may have been done through the organization. Through the Jewish organization that were handling all of our affairs there. Because by that time, all my father's property and monies had been confiscated. So I don't see how he could have had the money and could have done it himself. You know? But something was done. There were people there who informed him, and things were done. And telegrams were going back and forth to America, to our relatives. So things were done. And I got my visa at the very last minute. Because I remember, we got home, and everybody got their visa except me. And I was in a terrible state of depression at that point. And when we got home, and my parents were very upset about me, and they sent me to visit relatives who lived in different cities. You know? So I shouldn't be brooding about it. And--

INTERVIEWER 1: What-- you were upset about what?

SUBJECT: Well, I thought I would be the only one who didn't-- who wouldn't get out. This started already in Belgium, when I-- when my sister and my brother and my cousins, with whom I had lived for two years, all were able to leave and go back to Germany in order to emigrate, and I was the only one who left-- who was left behind, who couldn't go. So naturally, since nobody could emigrate anymore from Germany, I thought that this was the end of me. I mean, the end was very close at that point. You know? People were making all sorts of desperate efforts. But the way it turned out--

INTERVIEWER 1: Your fear was that the whole family--

SUBJECT: No, I thought my family would get out, but I wouldn't.

INTERVIEWER 1: You would be the only one left behind in Germany.

SUBJECT: Yes. First I thought I would be the only one left in Belgium, and then, when this happened in Germany, I thought I was going to be the one left. And as it turned out, the irony was, my cousin, who definitely thought she was going to get out, she was the one who-- who finally got killed. Because her parents-- her father had died in a concentration camp already at that time. He was one of those sent to Oranienburg. They lived in a small town, not far from ours. And so the mother and three girls were supposed to go a month after we did. And they didn't make it anymore. They did not make it anymore.

INTERVIEWER 1: Why?

SUBJECT: Well, they-- they couldn't emigrate anymore. When we left-- well, this is the next chapter. Our departure. So anyway, so finally, we-- I got my visa. And we left in May of 1941. And the only way one could get out of Germany at that time was via a transport which left from Berlin. They still sent out transports of about 80 Jews in a transport. And on trains. These were like trains. And we were sent through occupied France to Spain and Portugal, via Portugal. And on the way, we were fed. We were not allowed out, only whenever the train stopped in certain places, we could go to the washroom.

INTERVIEWER 1: It was a locked wagon, or--

SUBJECT: Locked train. Wagon. Locked wagon on a train.

INTERVIEWER 1: Passenger wagon.

SUBJECT: Yeah. Yes, it was a passenger wagon, yes. And we were in that for five days. Five days and five nights, until we got to Lisbon. And we-- we were fed by the Jewish organizations in certain places, who came and brought us bags with food through the windows.

INTERVIEWER 1: How did they know you were going to--

SUBJECT: Oh, it was organized through them. I think the Joint Refugee Organization organized this. And they fed us, and they saw to us. They were paid with American money for this by our relatives. And so it took five days to get through France to Spain.

INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember the departure from Berlin, the crossing of the German border, the crossing of the Spanish?

SUBJECT: No. We were locked in. The only thing I remember was-- well, there were always these curfews. When we were in Berlin, we stayed with relatives whom we had there, and they gave us clothes. And we-- to wear. We couldn't take anything anymore. We were allowed to take-- I think it was 10 marks, about $3.00 at that time. And of course, we didn't need anything until we got to-- well, everything was paid for. I don't think we needed anything on the way. And I remember, when we were in Paris, the train stopped for eight hours somewhere. And there, when we wanted to go to the washroom, we were always accompanied by guards and then were led back to the train. And the first time we were allowed out was in Spain. We crossed the Pyrenees, and there we had dinner in a restaurant, I remember. It was very nice. And we all went for a walk in a cornfield.

INTERVIEWER 1: What was it like?

SUBJECT: Pardon?

INTERVIEWER 1: What was that like?

SUBJECT: Oh, it was lovely. It was lovely. It was spring. It was beautiful. But then, it was beautiful, but at the same time, also very depressing. I mean, the landscape was beautiful. The idea of running out-- I remember, I ran into a field. I just ran and ran and ran. I-- and we had a very nice dinner there. But then also, Spain, at that time, was extremely depressing. As we-- when we arrived, the whole station was full of prostitutes and impoverished people and beggars all over, and we had nothing. And we were all coming there. You know? It was Franco Spain. That was terrible. We were very poor. Then when we arrived in Lisbon, we were taken to a hotel and completely taken care of. But there, we were practically eaten up by bed bugs. Full of bed bugs. And I remember, I slept in the bathtub. I couldn't stand the bed. And-- but we enjoyed it. Also-- yeah, Lisbon, we enjoyed. It was sort of a mixed bag. We did enjoy being in a hotel and eating proper food with wine every lunch and dinner. We were allowed to drink the wine too, the children. And then walked. However, there was the last shock. Another shock before we left. And that was that we had no tickets on the ship when we arrived there. At the time, when we arrived in Lisbon, the Germans had just invaded the Soviet Union. And there was panic. And people bribed unbelievable amounts to get out of Europe. And somebody had paid-- either the Jewish organization or the shipping company, I don't remember who-- that they gave away our tickets to someone else. And when we arrived, there were no tickets. We had no boat. The boat that we were supposed to go on, we were told we could not go on, and they would find us a boat. And here, we were. We were absolutely petrified. We had lost out so many times. You know? My parents, too, had bought trips via Russia, Dominican Republic, and here we were, stuck again. And we, too. I felt just so defeated. Here we were, at the end, we thought, finally we were out, and we were going to be caught again by the Nazis. And we thought surely they were going to walk through Spain because of Franco, and they were going to be there any day now. And we were ready to jump into-- I know I was ready to jump into the ocean at that time. And so we heard that the Spanish, in order to make money, are putting up boats, small boats, and are taking refugees across the ocean in those boats. And my French was quite fluent in those days. And in Portugal, most educated people spoke-- spoke French. And so my father and I walked from one shipping company to the next until we found one. And we found a company that had a ship that was going to America. It was called the Villia de Madrid. This was-- had originally been a Mediterranean luxury cruiser that the Spanish had outfitted. It was supposedly sunk during the Civil War. It was completely ruined during the Civil War, but they had renovated it. And it had originally been built for 150 people--

INTERVIEWER 3: During the Spanish Civil War?

SUBJECT: During the Spanish Civil-- what did I say? During the Spanish Civil War. Yes. And they had originally been a ship to take 150 people, but now they took over 1,000 on it. And we paid heavily for it, all with American money, of course. And we booked on that ship. We got onto it, and it took us three weeks to cross the ocean. But the conditions on the ship were horrendous. There were no toilet facilities, of course, for over 1,000 people. And in the machine rooms downstairs, they had put up these bunks. And I remember, we slept in these bunks. And every morning when I woke up, I would try to sit up and bang my head. Downstairs, when you came downstairs, the toilets were not working, and there weren't enough of them. I remember my sister once walked down and fainted from the stench and fell down the stairs. And then some nights, we just slept on boards upstairs, which was dangerous because the crew were terrible. They were after all the girls, and it was very dangerous. My father was terribly worried, and my mother got very sick. She had dysentery and was put in the hospital, and they didn't feed her. And there was a doctor on the ship who was always only concerned with women, not with illness. And so I cooked rice for her. Something. Now, and then we got to the Canary Islands. And we were interred-- they were going to inter us there, because this-- apparently, one Spanish ship that had arrived in New York was held there. And they didn't want to let it return, out of political reasons. There was some uproar. So they made us all send telegrams to let that ship go, so that we could go. Otherwise we would be interred-- interned on the Canary Islands, which was a horrible place in those days. I know it's a vacation place now. Supposedly very nice, but it wasn't very nice then. Very impoverished. Terrible place. But-- and we stayed there for a few nights. A few-- yeah. On the ship. But one thing, when we got there, was we bought lots of bananas, which we ate three times a week for the next-- until they were rotten, which was about a week or so after. So, and my mother being sick, and all of us sort of-- nobody was very well by the time we arrived in America. So that they couldn't let us into the country. Because we were all sick. And we weren't-- then we went to Ellis Island. And we stayed-- we were under quarantine in Ellis Island for a week or 10 days. My mother was in the hospital there. And that was a very funny experience. Because when we were in Ellis Island, they told us we didn't have anything to worry about, and we weren't going to be sent back. We thought we had arrived in heaven. I remember, it was so clean. The beds. And we couldn't believe that we were in a jail. We were all laughing. If this was a jail, we would like to stay here, we all said. And all that food! And I remember the breakfast with all the fruit. Fruit, we hadn't eaten for a long time, I guess. That we would take it-- they all said, you could take as much as you want. We would all take it. We were all thinking, the next meal wouldn't have fruit. And we actually liked it very much there, until finally, we got out. And then we were faced with other realities, which were very difficult. And that was that we had to pay back the enormous amounts of money that this journey had cost. Well, I'm in America now.

INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm. I like that. Any thoughts about those times? How it affected you, what remains of it.

SUBJECT: What remained of it?

INTERVIEWER 1: Yeah. What-- how it changed your life today.

SUBJECT: That's difficult to say. You know? Of course these things have very-- have a very deep and unforgettable effect on anybody who's gone through them. And they've made me politically conscious. And I don't know how to summarize that in a few words. That's-- that's very difficult. Because it has-- on many levels, it's had an enormous effect on my personality and my-- and my whole outlook on life. Yeah, that's-- that's very difficult to just summarize like that.

INTERVIEWER 1: OK. Thank you.

SUBJECT: You're welcome.

[TONE]