SUBJECT: Am I Polish?

INTERVIEWER 1: I-- no. I said, I knew you were not from Poland.

SUBJECT: It is Poland.

INTERVIEWER 1: Well, Vilna. Vilna is--

SUBJECT: Not living.

INTERVIEWER 2: Don't say this now. I want you to say this later. Don't. That's a very important aspect.

SUBJECT: That is one of my questions-- I ask, why? Why is it decided like this? That is the problem with Jewish point of--

INTERVIEWER 2: Look, in America, in the United States, nobody would think, go to--

CAMERAMAN: Tape 27.

INTERVIEWER 1: Tape 27.

INTERVIEWER 2: Tape 27. No one would ever think that-- that people would want to move.

CAMERAMAN: OK. This is tape 27 and we are rolling.

INTERVIEWER 2: Ms. Seidel tell us about where you came from, and the life you had, and--

SUBJECT: So I-- I was born in Vilna and have a normal life in-- I went to school, and dancing school, and have a very normal life, and very happy life, up to '39, when the war came between the German and Poland. And but we have luck that '40 and '49, in my town, Vilna, the Russia entered-- the Russia army entered. And so we have two years less troubles because only the Germans entered in '41. So I can study. And, perhaps, it was not the same like it was up to '39, but it was still a normal life.

INTERVIEWER 1: Under the Russians?

SUBJECT: Under the Russia. It was Lithuanian. It was the Lithuanian Republic. So we became a Lithuanian town and we lived up to '41.

INTERVIEWER 1: Before that, did you think of yourself as Lithuanians? As Polish? As Jews? How did you think of yourself?

SUBJECT: Yeah. But what?

INTERVIEWER 1: Before '39--

SUBJECT: Yes.

INTERVIEWER 1: How did think of yourself? As what?

SUBJECT: Of myself. I will tell you, our family-- I-- I was in a school among Jewish children. So we know we are Jewish. My mother was from a Jewish-- from a religious family-- but my father was assimilated. So we never-- they never thought about living in Poland. And they were good citizens-- Polish citizens, even though we have some anti-Semitism, from time to time, because, in our family, I have a brother-- six years older than I, than me. And he was a student when in '39, '38. So he even suffered some from the anti-Semitism. But that was all these problems were not a reason to-- to leave, because Jewish family, I think, there is some about-- they were so-- first of all, it was all big families. It was sisters, and brothers, and childrens. And they were very close, each to us. From the other side, everyone has his own house, or flat, or some-- everything what he worked all his life. So that was stronger than ever other thing. They never thought that it can come a moment that somebody-- a stranger-- can enter, and throw out them from all this, and to take them without reason. So you are out of the law. And even in '40, '41, we heard about that what happened to-- in Poland-- in Warsaw, in Krakow. It begin-- all of this-- not such in a strong way, but it began a ghetto and it began concentration camps, but not in such a big format. But even I remember, when I returned from school, my mother was always read the newspaper and she was very sensitive. So she always cried about that what she read in the newspaper, what happened in central Poland about the Jewish population. So I--

INTERVIEWER 1: It was in the newspaper?

SUBJECT: Yes. It was written in '41, but we were under the Russia-- Lithuania. So I remember-- even it was so close to us-- that I always ask her, why you are crying? It must be a reason that people are arrested or people are put in concentration camp. It cannot be that a normal nation take another nation and they kill them without reason. Because I even cannot understand, as a girl from 16. But-- so in '41, when break the war between German and Russia-- so I was, in the moment, standing in the street-- on the head street-- when the German army entered. It was some very big, strong army, because we saw, before, the Polish army, the Russia army. It was also. But it was such a strong thing that even I, as a child, saw it was impossible to fight this-- all this. So I remember about what the families-- Jewish-- thought Why they-- they have even two years to disappear. Because all the people, they were from Warsaw. They came to Vilna. Or from Krakow. And during the '40, '41, they bought paper or some documents and they went to Russia, to Japan, to disappear. But only the people from the town-- from Vilna alone-- they sit on the place without moving, because they believe that nothing can move them from the place. And I remember when I was standing on the street and it was a matter of my good friend. And I ask her, what will be now? So she told me, don't be afraid. We know the German nation. It is not so bad. We work together with them during the first war. And, first of all, they will give us back our houses that Russia take-- took from us. That was the money problem. But it will-- it is a nation. It is not so bad. It will be all right. But it was not like this. Because nobody from that family-- as a family, we have 70,000 Jewish. This was the population in Vilna. And even a very, very small part survived. It was even only three years-- less than in Warsaw or in Krakow-- but it was from the first moment, in a very strong way, because they looked on as not only like Jewish-- it was enough to be Jewish in that time. But they looked also-- or they pointed that we must be also communist because we have the two years with Russia. I remember I have one moment when I went out from the ghetto on the-- on the-- like no Jewish? Irish?

INTERVIEWER 1: Aryan.

SUBJECT: Aryan. Because I had a very good face, and I can walk like Aryan, I was a child, nobody know me, so-- and I was, part of the time, between-- in a cloister-- between-- with this--

INTERVIEWER 2: In a convent.

INTERVIEWER 1: Convent.

INTERVIEWER 2: Convent.

SUBJECT: Convent, yes. It was out of the town. And some Christian woman give-- she has some friend. She was alone there and she bring me. It was a good place to be because the German-- it was out of the German-- they were closed. So I remember I have some problems that one girl took from me many things. And she told that another man, and he came, and told, how you can hold a Jewish girl there? If you will not send her back, I will bring the police and gestapo. And then this is not only I, but all the people that were there-- all the monks-- not the monks, but the women--

INTERVIEWER 1: The nuns.

SUBJECT: The nuns will be killed. So they told-- he told them-- I remember I was sitting in the same room-- it is not a problem she wants-- she wants to survive her life. She must be also communist. He decided. That was-- and I remember all people they caught in the town. That they never can recognize a Jewish, or no Jewish, or German without help from the Lithuanian or some Polish-- they work together. So they always thought that never the people want to survive [INAUDIBLE] because he's out of the ghetto. He's also a communist. He must be a spion or something.

INTERVIEWER 1: A spy.

SUBJECT: A spy. But it is enough to be a Jew in that time, so you have two other thing more. So our family, when the German entered, we live in a very nice flat. So the flat was taken. In 15 minutes, they enter, in our flat, the Polish police and Lithuanian. They don't-- they didn't give us the possibility-- how it was in central Poland-- a few weeks to go to the ghetto, but they came, 15 minutes time-- you can take--

INTERVIEWER 2: 15?

SUBJECT: 15 minutes time.

INTERVIEWER 2: 1-5?

SUBJECT: A quarter of an hour.

INTERVIEWER 2: In a quarter of an hour, they asked you to take everything?

SUBJECT: To take what you can take. What can you take in a quarter of an hour? And to go out from your flat, from all you have.

INTERVIEWER 1: How long was this of after you saw the German army come in?

SUBJECT: It was a think of two weeks, perhaps, because, during the two weeks, it happened also many things. First of all, we live in a-- a part of the town that was also Jewish and also Polish. But it was a part-- a small-- the small streets. It was once the ghetto. And that was special Jewish. So they decided to build the ghetto in that small streets. So my-- my brother married a girl. He went to-- they were friends for five years. And her mother has a house in that small streets, where the ghetto should be built. So before all this, they make such things-- they told that, first of all, they can to take the man. Because, in the beginning, the women, they didn't touch. No women, no children. Only men. And they-- they went to some Polish and Lithuanian-- especially Lithuanian people, they worked together with the German-- to the Jewish houses. They had addresses from the community where the Jewish people went. And they looked for-- they asked for the men. They took them not-- they took them how they stand before the ghetto. They told they are going for-- to a concentration camp, but it was not true. Nobody from them came back. They killed them. It was in-- from the beginning. So my parents were very strong people. I never was a fighter, as a girl. But in that position, when the German entered, something happened to me in my-- in my insight, that I became to be stronger than the other family. It was interesting. Something happened. Because I never-- in the school, I never was such a girl to fight, to go. I never complained to my mother. What would be me at the time was so quiet. So I was really quiet, very quiet. So it was a few reasons it happened why-- my father was caught on the way to his work, before the ghetto. He was office from like here [? [LITHUANIAN]. ?]

INTERVIEWER 1: A lottery.

SUBJECT: Yes. A lottery. But it was some big thing in Poland. And they told him to come to the work and they will take care of him. So on the way-- on the way to the work, he went together with a Christian woman. She was working together, in the same office. And because he was afraid, because it happened many things on the way. So on the way he was caught from some policemen, in private. And we even didn't know about it. But after that, she came and told us. And they took all the group of the men they caught that day out of the town, to a-- an airport. And there were German pilots. And they took all the group. And they did with them terrible things. They beat them and they-- with guns. And they had to work very hard, all the day. And one of the things what happened-- they told him to dig--

INTERVIEWER 1: Ditches.

SUBJECT: To dig in the-- in the--

INTERVIEWER 1: In the ground.

SUBJECT: But one boy was [INAUDIBLE] from 20. So they decided that he's a communist because he was in-- in the work-- such--

INTERVIEWER 2: He was in work clothes?

SUBJECT: Work clothes. And they beat him, and they put him in there. He was alive still.

INTERVIEWER 2: They put him in the hole?

SUBJECT: In the hole. They covered the head. All the Jewish-- my father was between them-- to cover that with earth. My father told after that, when he returned, that he saw his eyes. He will never forget it because it was a terrible thing. This was in the beginning. And they told him to dance on the grave. To dance. And after that, they begin to dig for the other, but what happened-- suddenly, came Russia pilots with--

INTERVIEWER 1: Planes.

SUBJECT: Airplane. And they decided to bomb. So they took out the guns. And said, now, run! Where to run? Away? We run away. So when my father returned that day-- that was only one day-- and he came back. I didn't recognize him because he was white here. And from that day, it happened something to him that he cannot listen to a German voice. He was terribly frightened.

INTERVIEWER 2: What do you mean he was white?

SUBJECT: The hair became grey.

INTERVIEWER 2: In one day?

SUBJECT: In one day. You can believe that. You would take a live-- live person and do like this. So what can happen to a person. He didn't believe even that he will be-- that he will return. So we decided to put him-- because, every day, came-- it was some special persons. They were private-- private persons. But they worked together with the Germans, they knocked to the doors, and they came, and they ask about the men. They know it's a family, it's a son, a father. So we decided that we take-- because it was a big-- a big flat-- and there was a few families in there, because, during the Russia, the '40, '41, we all were put in the other flat, because it was not allowed to live in a big flat, during the Russia government. So they give us a big flat and everyone has one room or two room, like this. So in that flat, it was seven rooms, so it was a few families. So we take-- we took one room near the kitchen. It was especially before a room for the-- for the--

INTERVIEWER 2: For the help?

SUBJECT: For the help. And we put something-- some wardrobe-- like this, to cover that. And I always-- when they were knocked in the door, they came. I always sit-- it was all things that was before the ghetto. I was sitting on the window. I was seeing that somebody is coming. So I opened the door. They disappeared in that home-- all the men. They were in some flats. And he asked me, where is this? And this? So I knew, you know? I know all the name of places where the Jewish people worked. And I would say, they went to work. So they never had possibility, up to the ghetto, to take the men from our flat because we really--

INTERVIEWER 1: You hid them.

SUBJECT: They were safe there. They were safe. And-- but my father was very afraid. So he was afraid to go out, even on the street, even to buy something. So I that one that he-- to be the person that went out and bought bread and everything. And-- but I went and I took out my signs what I'm Jewish, because we have-- from the first moment when they entered, they gave us-- they told us to put--

INTERVIEWER 1: A yellow badge.

SUBJECT: A yellow badge from two sides. So I have it on.

INTERVIEWER 2: Two sides?

SUBJECT: Yes. Here and here. So when you here, from that side, you have it on the same place. So when I went as not Jewish, I took my coat on the hand. And I went like Aryan, not Jewish. Some people thought that I am even German, because I looked really very good. So they-- I always only afraid not to meet somebody that knew me as Jewish. That was the one reason.

INTERVIEWER 2: You spoke Polish or--

SUBJECT: Polish, yes. I spoke Polish, I spoke Russian, also German. So-- and one day when-- and that was the problem with my father. And my brother also has his tragedy up to the ghetto. One day, before that, some people came in the district where he was married and living. It was the Jewish district. And they had some news that the family is very rich. They know the Gestapo were-- they came. And they want to have some gold things, and the jewel, and all of this. So they have-- some, they have in the house, but some, they have in a place in-- it was a big house for many neighbors. So they put in a place in the house where they hold some cord and so on. So I always walked between the two houses. And one day, when I came there, they told me, you know, the Gestapo was here and they took many things from us. They even took all of the things without-- and-- but they know that there are more things. They told us, if you will not give it, they will took all the family and they will kill us. So they have-- they have many other things. They give it to me, to put it on me, because I walked not like a Jewish, so perhaps I can save it. So I walked, really, perhaps, two weeks with so many demands on me that my mother became very afraid that one day, when I can be caught as Jewish and they will only see the jewel on me, I will be killed only because of that. So she-- I must promise her that I will give it back to the family. And one day, I came to that house and they--

Change of tape

INTERVIEWER: So then they said we-- the Lithuanians loved the Jews. The Lithuanians were good to the Jews. The Poles were bad.

SUBJECT 1: That's not true.

INTERVIEWER: I'll just tell you what they said. So, you know, there I am. They're my guests on my program and I'm not going to let this go by, you know?

SUBJECT 1: They worked together with the Germans-- close, like this. And they--

INTERVIEWER: OK. Now came the war. Or now came-- excuse me-- the two weeks are over and--

SUBJECT 1: Yes. The people-- the police came and throw out us from our flats in 15 minutes. And we--

INTERVIEWER: And what could you take?

SUBJECT 1: We only can take things-- back. Nothing.

INTERVIEWER: But you said you knew from before.

SUBJECT 1: We know before. Yes.

INTERVIEWER: And did you put anything away? Did you hide things?

SUBJECT 1: We put away, we hide things. We put to some Polish families, but not all families give it back. That is because we are out of the law. That is one of the problems that when I have a first contact with it. Because when they saw out from the house, I have not such a terrible feeling, like my parents, perhaps, because they worked all their life to have all that what they have. And I was only a child. So I even didn't understand why they are so brochen. So I always said-- and that is, perhaps, one of the things that a young person look from another point of view on the life, even if it is a very, very terrible situation. But you look, always, for another point or way. The way I understand it, my mother was always afraid that something can happen to me. So I even have some gold rings. So she took it from me and she put it in a-- in a coat where-- because the Germans gave-- to take all gold, and all silver, and all the radio things, and everything to bring them back. No, some things you must bring back, but some many things, people hide. So I remember our-- in our house, my mother gave me all our knives and things-- all the-- from the silver. Because we have two choice-- to give it up to German, but to take it-- we cannot. And she told me, give it to the man. He is cleaning the house, you know? Some Polish. So I give it to him. And even he told me, you know, that your flat will go-- they will be here-- Germans will live here, because it is on the central street, near the railways. So I will tell you something. It is some two pictures-- it was some two pictures of our walls. One, it was my mother with my brother, when he was a very small boy, and one picture was me, when I was, perhaps, 11 years or something like that. So he told me, when they will tell me to take out the pictures, because it will be Goering, or Hitler, or somebody, he said, yeah, I will hold that, I will hide that. Perhaps, one day, you will come back. So-- so one day after, I am running after threes. We survived and I had turned back from all the house. We only survived half the family-- I and my father. Because my-- my mother was killed in-- after the ghetto and many other thing. She was taken in a concentration camp in Lithuania, in Latuania?

SUBJECT 2: Latvia.

SUBJECT 1: Latvia. And it was near Riga. It was a camp. And they worked there some year. It was at the time when the Russian army was very close coming, but they have no other choice what to do with the people-- or to break them to the sea or to-- or to kill them. So they make-- after that, I found a girl. She was together with my mother because her mother was-- it was one German. Even Vilna was in the hand of Russia. That I was survived and my mother was in that camp. And he took all women from 40 years-- 40 years. And even they were children, so he took the children. It was a selection. So it was the last word of my mother was a girl told me she was here. She said that she was happy that, in that moment, I am not with her, together.

INTERVIEWER: Your mother said this?

SUBJECT 1: Yes.

INTERVIEWER: To this girl.

SUBJECT 1: To the girl. Because she took them to a car. It was a special-- that it was not such thing like in Auschwitz. It was very-- they make the gas, but it was special, new made. In that camp, it was a car. And they put the people in the car-- in a closed car-- and the gasoline came to the car. And they made them dead. That was the way my mother was killed. That's what the girl told me, but-- because her mother was killed on the same way. So no places and no-- I only know some time when that happened.

INTERVIEWER: And when was the last time you saw your mother?

SUBJECT 1: I saw my mother a year before, because we-- I was on the other side-- time. I went from the ghetto. It was interesting. Why I went from the ghetto is [INAUDIBLE]. When they put us in ghetto, we came in very small streets, in very old houses. So in one of room was 30 people, 25 people, laying like this-- in such condition. And they began to send us to work-- to very hard work. Men were out of the ghetto, some women out of the ghetto, some women in the ghetto, and so on. And one day, they make-- I remember my father, when we came into the ghetto and we were the happy people, because from 70,000 Jewish people that were in Vilna, only 30,000 came in ghetto, from the first-- from the first moment. So after a few weeks, they came in Vilna-- 40,000 was killed. It was a special place in Vilna. It is Ponary out of the town. And there were graves, like this. So they put with guns, people. And they killed them because-- we didn't know it, but after that. It-- it became-- when it became action every few time. Every two weeks, they came in the ghetto. So it was a reason to take people. They give us some documents. So some was documents-- yellow document was-- who has a yellow document is to be-- to live. He has another document-- is to be taken. So they broke us inside. So from the first moment, they begin to turn one on the other. So you are not more together with your family. Your father is no more father, the child is not-- you are taking one from the other. And it can be a fight for the surviving.

INTERVIEWER: A fight for the documents.

SUBJECT 1: For the documents, for-- for-- to-- to run away. Some people want to run away. Where to run away? Because the population outside was not so ready to help us-- the Polish population, the Lithuanian population. Only a very small, small percent. I know them because I was, a long time, out. And I was in touch with that people. The-- the Christian, really Christian, the religious, they were-- yes-- ready because Christian religious are told to help. But not all people populations. They think they're religious, they are really Christian, like this.

INTERVIEWER: What was last vision you had of your mother?

SUBJECT 1: Yes. The last vision was-- when it came, I was, part of the time, out of the gate, because my father got yellow documents. On the yellow documents, it was a document from his work. It was told that he can-- it is on the same permission his wife and only children up to 13. I was 16. So they-- one day, they crowded us-- the ghetto. And gestapo came to the ghetto, to the tower. It was some tower where they stayed. And all the people has to go out, one after the other. They have the yellow documents. They took us out of the ghetto to the places of the work. The others they have not, they were staying in the ghetto. They close, they took us to killed. Who was hiding, was hiding and was hidden. It was some luck to-- to stay. So my brother cannot go with that because he was older. So he'd built on the roof, with some boys, a wall from wool-- from wood. Some hidden place. And he survived in that moment, from the action. But I want-- I make myself to be 13. So I make some--

INTERVIEWER: Pigtails?

SUBJECT 1: Like-- like a child. But I have another friend of me that her father asked my parents to survive her, to take her. So they take all boats? But then happens a very interesting thing-- the German-- the head of the Germans-- I don't know who it was-- he was looking everyone. So I-- my father was black hair. And my-- my mother was brown hair with blue eyes. But I, on my-- I was the one really blonde. And that was always very specially because I always looked like not Jewish. So and my friend was also black. So I give her-- so the German looked in the document of my father. He take-- give him the permission to go out, my mother, and then he give the friend. And when he came to me, he looked at me, like this. He took my face-- in ghetto-- there's not to asking questions in ghetto. He took my face like this and asked me, you are Jewish? You know, a German gestapo in ghetto ask somebody he's Jewish-- he must be Jewish when he's in ghetto. So he-- and that is your father and your mother? He didn't believe. Then I said, yes. So before he ask, he looked at me, like this-- very careful. My mother was trembling like this, because he was afraid that something happened to me. So after the question, he told that, yes. It was my first time. And he gave me the permission to go out. Then I decided I will no go back to ghetto more. And I stay-- I have a big help from some Christian woman. She was a good friend of us. She helped us a lot. And she took me and my friend in her house. And it was many, many things happen, because the population in the house-- so my brother came after that with some friend. And they saw him, and they-- they make some pressure that they will go to the Gestapo and tell. It was very difficult to stay out, because you have all the population against you. It was, perhaps, sometimes more difficult than to be Jewish and to be in ghetto. Because my mother never wanted to go out of the ghetto. She told me always, it was a time that I want to prepare some paper-- papers and documents for them, like not Jewish, to give them the possibility to go out. My mother was-- didn't want. She was afraid of the population. She was against the Jewish. And she said what will be with all the Jewish people will be with me. And she didn't want to go out from the ghetto. But I-- after a time, I was out. I was in between the-- in the cloister in the--

SUBJECT 2: Convent.

INTERVIEWER: Convent.

SUBJECT 1: And after that, I have some girl. She took from me some things, some many, very important thing. And they have to get rid of me, so they sent me to other place, because they were afraid to hold me. And they sent me to some farm.

INTERVIEWER: Did you see your mother again?

SUBJECT 1: Yes. I returned after all-- I was many months out of there. I had no contact with the ghetto, only with the-- through the Christian woman. She, really, was very brave. And she was very-- really-- she even entered the ghetto to my pants and-- with letters and with many things. So one day, somebody looked at me in the farm and saw that I am not looking like a farm girl. It was a really even a prisoner-- a Russia prisoner. And he told that one of the woman-- that she's looking like a girl from a town, and she has too much intelligence, and so many things. So they decide-- it was many things-- I must leave there. So the Christian woman came to me to take me back to Vilna. And what was very difficult to go back because it was-- it was not allowed between-- go between-- it was Belarus and White Russia.

SUBJECT 2: White Russia.

SUBJECT 1: White Russia. And that was Lithuanian. So it was really--

SUBJECT 2: There was a border?

SUBJECT 1: A border. So on the way there, I went with a horse and with some man. He didn't know who I am. And because some people were killed on the way, when they know that they are Jewish. And they took all these things. So he knows that he took a girl from the Christian religious people and he has to bring me to the farm. But back, it was-- he must have a special permission from the government. So there was one-- was one way to go-- by German car. So you go back from the front. There were some wounded and so on. And they go. So some Polish people hold them on the way, paid them some money, so they took him by the car. So it was one way not to be-- to look the documents. Because I have some documents. They made me a document. I got a document. I was older-- 10 years. And that girl was very-- it was difficult. Because today, 10 years older is-- but when I was 16 and then I must be 27, it was difficult. And it was made the stamp on a very bad way. When you looked at it under your light, you saw it. But I have no other choice. I have the document on another name. And they walked with the document. So when I go back with the document-- and I was in that car. The German-- some soldiers came and so they put all the people-- it was some big car, some Auto Masse.

SUBJECT 2: A truck.

SUBJECT 1: A truck. But me, they put near the driver. And it was another German. Then-- and we went on he way. So on the way, they spoke. And I-- I must-- I do it-- I don't understand. I understand everything what they talk about me, but I-- I did--

INTERVIEWER: What did they say?

SUBJECT 1: Because Polish-- because Polish people, they-- it was not good to know German, because they know the German must know somebody, perhaps, Jewish. Because Polish, very seldom, know German. So on the way, it was very dark in evenings. They make some-- it was a joke. But a joke-- I think when I didn't get a heart attack in that joke. I-- I must be very strong. So they decided, on the way, it was-- trick tracks, like this, with people-- these German soldiers. So they decided to hold in the one place when they crossed the border, and to go to some people-- country to people to drink something, to eat some something, because they were hungry. So they told all the people to go together with them to the house. It was some-- I don't know. We saw the houses from far away. And they will eat something. But I didn't want to-- to go out from the car. So they all went and I stayed, in the middle of night. What it is-- I don't know if it's evening. It was December, so we have very cold. So I sit in the car, near the driver. The driver went also. And then, after a quarter of an hour, the two German-- one was the high officer-- came back and told me, you know, we want to see your documents. So you must go to police together with us and to look your documents.

INTERVIEWER: This was the joke?

SUBJECT 1: Yes. So I know that, in the moment they took me to the policemen, that is the end. What-- because they will see the documents and [INAUDIBLE]. But they were very-- they didn't laugh. So they were very strong.

SUBJECT 2: Serious.

SUBJECT 1: Serious. It was dark. And so they took me. And one take out the gun. We don't know who are you. Perhaps you are a stranger, you know? So one-- they give me to go like this. And they are going with a gun, under me. So we walked, and walked, and walk. And you can understand what happened to me inside. To run away-- they will kill with a gun. What to do? So I-- I hope-- I hope, like one, you know-- in that moment, you believe in some-- something would happen to you. That is one of the reasons why the Jewish community went to-- even to such to kill. They always believed that something will happen. Something. A miracle. And then they brought me to that house. It was there. They opened the door. And all the people began to laugh. That was a joke. And you can believe what-- what kind of a joke it was. So that is one of the-- of this. After that, I-- I was some time in that farm. And then I returned back to ghetto. And I worked for the German people, but, always, when I go out-- went out in the town-- and because we are not allowed to go on the-- only on the street, like horses. But I always went with dark glasses. I bought special, dark classes, like here, on the sun, because I always want to have the possibility, if I want, one day, to go out, that somebody will not recognize me as Jewish.

INTERVIEWER: And your mother?

SUBJECT 1: Yes. And then it came the situation-- '42. ' 42. My mother worked all the time.

Change of tape

SUBJECT 1: You must speak with my husband. He has a very interesting story.

SUBJECT 2: One party.

INTERVIEWER: OK. Just have him to be quiet and wait. OK.

CREW: Rolling

INTERVIEWER: Take 28.

CREW: 29.

INTERVIEWER: 29. Take 29.

SUBJECT 1: So in '42, as the war began to be stronger and the army-- we know when the Russia army will begin to go forth, this will be very bad for us. And then one day the ghetto was closed. They didn't allow us to go out to the work or to people we walk out of the ghetto. And eh-- it was very dangerous for people when you were in ghetto to be without work. Without work, it-- eh-- it is death. So you must be something-- to do something. So eh-- my father decided to go out from the ghetto to the Christian woman to hide himself for such of a practical time. And eh-- I went to some family to another camp. It was built an Nazi camp. A small camp, 4,500 people. Eh-- eh-- just a-- just a moment-- I must remember. No.

INTERVIEWER: And your mother, she stayed in the camp?

SUBJECT 1: And my mother stayed. I went to visit family as their daughter. So they changed my name. It's very easy to do because we have no photos and no so on. And for a short time-- and my father and my mother believed that when it was built another camp where we will work. My father will take me from that camp, my mother from the ghetto and we'll stay together. But it was only a plan. You know, during war I learned one thing and that went after me even in the normal life. I never more-- when we survived, I never allowed myself to be depart from my father. It was summer time on the way here to the country. We stay in Marcel and I was pregnant. And they decided because I was pregnant, it was in a-- not a normal area. It was half-- it was English there still. It was before '48. So they want to send me and my father to stay in the camp and after. I tell no more. Because I learn one thing. You know, during the war, the first time when I went from the ghetto, I told you, I went very easily. But when they came back, it was a difficult time. And many action and many people were killed. And many people were taken and family was broken, pack after pack, because they broke us practically. So you have one way, you know, or two to survive alone. Because with all family it was impossible. It was impossible. So some people had decided to go on their way or they-- they have luck and they survive or not. But all family, all family, three, four people you have very, very, seldom survive together.

INTERVIEWER: Your mother was still in the ghetto?

SUBJECT 1: My mother was in the ghetto. And I went to that camp. And during one week, it was a liquidation of the ghetto. So I stay in the camp. My father out with a Christian woman. He go out like this only for a short time. And my mother was taken. I even didn't know. But I remember that they hold them. It was a terrible rain, perhaps three or four days. And they know that some people, they took where-- I don't know where. They hold them on the-- near the cemetery.

INTERVIEWER: You went there?

SUBJECT 1: Out on the street, they crowded.

INTERVIEWER: But you went to see?

SUBJECT 1: I know I can't. I was closed in a camp. So I remember only that a few days I terribly cried because I really understand that I will never see more my mother.

INTERVIEWER: When was the last time you saw her?

SUBJECT 1: That was when we left-- when we left to the-- to the camp. She told me even-- she pushed me to go to to the visit because it-- it was-- it was parents of my good friend and they have the papers. So they decided it was for a short time to be sure for me to go because I was without work. It was not good to be visible. And my mother was working. We don't know that will be a liquidation of the ghetto. But after all when I was survived and I was in Lourdes, so one person said Carol Kim what they told you was that she was the pact together. And she told me that my mother was alive for a year more after '44. That was--

INTERVIEWER: What do you remember when you last saw your mother? What-- what memory do you have of her?

SUBJECT 1: What memory? I will tell you, she was a very strong women. And she understand-- she understood what is going to be with all the Jewish population. But she has not enough strongness to go out and to fight for-- for the life, you know. That eh-- you must be a special-- eh-- I don't know how to understand how all of this came. But when I think about all that time what many thing happened, it is only a small part what I'm telling you here. It is even not in the 1% what happened during the day. But she decided what will be this-- all the Jewish population will be with her. And eh-- really I-- I-- she wanted-- she want one thing-- she believed-- she thought-- she believed that I will be survive because she believed that I look like no Jewish. And I all have-- always lots of people wanted to help me.

INTERVIEWER: Did she say goodbye to you, no?

SUBJECT 1: No, because when I say to her goodbye, I didn't understand that I am going-- I went to the camp. So I thought perhaps a week or more, I will see her back. So I never saw-- saw her back. This is one of the things we have only today. We have pictures eh-- what they made. They have some eh-- memories. They made some. I have not here this. I have for my father. He died four years ago. He was here together with me. And from her, I have some picture, a special medal long necklace, because I have never-- not-- not the grave and not the place, nothing for them. So that is eh-- that is eh-- it's not only for her, because even she has many sisters and brothers and they have cousins and no-- no one from them survived. No one from them survived. So somebody you look-- you think about how it happens that you really survive. It is-- I don't know. I don't think that we were cleverer than the other people. Because some very clever people, intelligent people lost their life. It was very difficult to know how to-- what to do and how to-- to-- how to do it because it came every hour-- came another another-- another low, another thing that you take out from the low. I remember I cried some one day when I was between the nuns. Some girl took from me many things that my father brought out from the ghetto because he thought that I'm in a very good place that he believes that I will stay here and I will be sure there. And she knows that I am-- she knew that I was Jewish because the other didn't know. So one day I stayed with my Christian friend in the town. It was very late. She told me you cannot go to the-- out of the town. It is very risk to go out, because even the Polish were afraid to go. And she told me you can stay one night here. When I didn't came back, they were sure that I was arrested. And tomorrow it was some police came. But it wasn't as a reason because of me. So she was in the place. She took all that I had, some material and I had some good things. So she took all these things. And when I came back and I saw that-- So the first time I was-- I cried so much, not because of the things I lost. I understand one thing, that I feel that I am without law. Everyone, even a small girl can do with you what you want. That was something would break, you know, inside.

INTERVIEWER: What are you left with? What are you left with? What feeling do you keep from this terrible time?

SUBJECT 1: For the terrible time? I will tell you. And after we survived, not from that camp, if I stay in the concentration camp-- it was not Auschwitz, but a small camp-- I even didn't survive. Because eh-- I have-- I came to that camp with a family. And I have a very good contact with a Christian women and some help. And my father was still outside. So we decided to build-- to build eh-- a place for-- to be sure-- because you can not stay in the flat. You know, some neighbors came. And everyone has what to-- what to do. So I eh-- organized. I go out and organize eh-- um-- the place. She took a special flat in a special region where it is possibility to close one room. And my father wrote-- eh-- signed a special eh-- library-- like a library, you know to put-- but it was from the kitchen. And not to put eh-- a-- from the kitchen sink. But it was closed over the door. It was a room out of that door. So how we go in. When somebody knocked on the door, it was a special opening like this. So we were like cats or like dogs on the moment. We pushed here and we close it. And it was only one bed. It was a very, very small room we were sitting four people there. I took with me-- my father was there. When I went-- when I disappear from that camp-- I took with me a girl from 12. It was a sister for my friend. And I want to have also her mother. But she decided at the last moment to stay with her husband. So she was killed on the-- in that camp on the cart. And he-- the man disappear. They-- after that, they went to United States because the girl was-- noticed there was a girl. But we stayed three and half months in such a closed place. So she must be very careful, even from the neighbor, even with the food, -- even with it-- it was no-- even no-- eh-- um-- toilet. Some small thing. So four people to help at home. You want-- but I was only 16 and 17. I hold a very regime there, because I understand one-- understood one thing, when we-- because my father was very broken. He even-- it was a time he-- what he had with him some stalk-- how do you say? He wanted to hang him. He was very broken. He didn't-- he didn't believe that he will survive one day. But when I came into the place-- so-- one thing, I ask of many books because we were closed to write. One other thing, I knit a lot. I have a feeling that I must do something, otherwise, something will happen to me. And I-- I-- I have some hobby. I-- I-- knit. I knit. I sew. You know, I do many things. And even in the evening, you know, I have regimes that we have to wash, because otherwise we would be very dirty, you know. And I even I-- I hold them all to be-- to be nice and close not-- not to-- not on to block yourself, you know, not to-- even when I was in the-- and after 3 and 1/2 months, so sitting close without air and without anything, without contact with people, only by news something happened on the front here or not. One day the army-- Russia army came near to the town. And then we have a week of battle in the town. So it was we-- we were without water and without eh-- electricity. And all the population ran away from that town because it was street after street they bombed and so on. But she was terribly afraid, the Christian women. But she knows she has four people. She has to care on us. So stay with us. So all the neighbors thought that she is a very hero. But she was not a hero. It was the situation brought her to stay with us together. So it was a first Russia soldier when we saw, you know, from such a point. So we even want to go out and to give him a kiss because it was really not too unbelievable.

INTERVIEWER: And that was liberation for you.

SUBJECT 1: And that was liberation.

CREW: Please. Rolling.

INTERVIEWER: Rolling.

CREW: It's rolling.

INTERVIEWER: Ah, run.